JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: North
Korea conducts
its biggest nuclear test yet,
creating what
registered as a 5.3-magnitude
earthquake and
sparking swift condemnation from
leaders around
the world.
Then: Fifteen years after 9/11,
the U.S. struggles
to hand over security to
Afghanistan's military
force, as the Taliban makes a
resurgence.
GEN.
JOHN NICHOLSON, U.S. Commander
in Afghanistan:
We're trying to build an
airplane while in
flight, OK?
So they're fighting a war while
we're trying
to build an army.
This is very hard.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze the
week's news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: North Korea is at
the epicenter
of world attention tonight.
It blasted its way there today
with a nuclear
explosion that touched off
shockwaves, both
seismic and political.
The test drew global criticism,
and raised
fresh questions about what if
anything can
be done.
We will have the full story
after the news
summary.
The U.S. presidential campaign
also echoed
today with talk of the North
Korean blast
with two months to go until
Election Day.
Lisa Desjardins has the story.
LISA DESJARDINS: The North Korea
news forced
both American candidates to
respond, Hillary
Clinton after meeting with a
national security
panel in New York.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
We are not going to let North
Korea pursue
a nuclear weapon with the
ballistic missile
capacity to deliver it to the
United States
territory.
That is absolutely a bottom
line.
LISA DESJARDINS: Donald Trump
argued it's
another of what he says were
Clinton's catastrophic's
failures.
He spoke at the Values Voter
Summit in Washington.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Just today, it was announced
that North Korea
performed its fifth nuclear
test, its fourth
since Hillary Clinton became
secretary of
state.
It's just one more massive
failure from a
failed secretary of state.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Republican
hit on a different
foreign policy issue last night,
when he spoke
to Larry king on R.T., a news
channel run
by the Russian government.
LARRY KING, R.T.: U.S.
intelligence and law
enforcement agencies reportedly
are investigating
whether Russia launched a covert
operation
to disrupt the 2016 election.
What do you make of that?
DONALD TRUMP: I think it's
probably unlikely.
I think maybe -- maybe the
Democrats are putting
that out.
Who knows?
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump's
campaign said later
he didn't mean to go on Russian
state TV.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Campaign
Manager:
He actually did an interview
with Larry King,
and he said he was doing it for
his podcast;
he didn't know it would be on
Russia TV.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile,
Clinton in Kansas
City last night signaled a shift
in tone away
from Trump attacks, and toward
her personal
side, addressing the National
Baptist Convention.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I still
remember my
late father, a gruff former Navy
man on his
knees praying by his bed every
night.
That made a big impression on me
as a young
girl, seeing him humble himself
before God.
LISA DESJARDINS: This
going-positive push
is multimedia, including this
new TV ad stressing
her message.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: We have
got to bring
people together.
LISA DESJARDINS: Candidates and
voters will
take a break this weekend.
Both Trump and Clinton have
agreed to suspend
campaigning Sunday to mark the
15th anniversary
of September 11.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today, early
voting began
in North Carolina, the first of
37 states
that allow the practice.
A federal judge today refused to
stop construction
of a hotly contested oil
pipeline near a North
Dakota Indian reservation.
But right after that, three
federal agencies
asked that the pipeline builder
pause the
work voluntarily.
The Standing Rock Sioux say that
the project
harms water supplies and
disturbs ancient
sites.
And thousands of protesters are
supporting
their cause.
Wall Street took a beating today
on fears
of higher interest rates and
lower oil prices.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 394
points to close at 18085.
The Nasdaq fell 133 points and
the S&P 500
slid 53.
The U.S. House of
Representatives has given
final approval to letting
families of 9/11
victims sue Saudi Arabia.
Fifteen of the 19 hijackers that
day were
Saudis, but Riyadh strongly
objects to the
bill, and the White House warns
of a veto.
Still, Republican Congressman
Peter King of
New York and others say they're
undeterred.
REP.
PETER KING (R), New York: This
is the most
basic constitutional right.
This is an obligation.
It's an obligation we in the
Congress have
to not allow foreign lobbyists
or foreign
countries or anyone else to
intimidate us.
Justice must be done.
And we want to make sure that
there are no
more 9/11s.
This is one more step we can
take to show
foreign governments they cannot
step aside,
they cannot walk away if
something is carried
out where they're sort of
looking the other
way making believe it's not
happening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The vote came
after House members
from both parties marked 9/11 on
the steps
of the Capitol.
They paused for a moment of
silence and then
sang "God Bless America" in the
same location
where they gathered shortly
after the attacks
15 years ago Sunday.
New warnings today on Samsung's
Galaxy Note
7 phone because the batteries
can explode
and spark fires.
Now the Consumer Production --
Protection
Safety Commission is telling
people to stop
using the phones and turn them
off.
And the Federal Aviation
Administration warns
against bringing them on
airplanes.
Samsung has issued a global
recall.
And a NASA probe is off on a
seven-year first-of-its-kind
mission to gather samples from
an asteroid,
and return them to Earth.
A rocket launched the probe from
Cape Canaveral,
Florida, on Thursday evening.
An hour later, the OSIRIS-REx
spacecraft shot
out of orbit.
It's heading for the asteroid
Bennu to bring
back about two ounces of dust.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
reevaluating
the global approach to North
Korea after its
latest nuclear test; Mark
Shields and David
Brooks analyze the week's news;
and much more.
latest nuclear test; Mark
Shields and David
Brooks analyze the week's news;
and much more.
We return to our top story:
North Korea's
latest nuclear test and its
reverberations
around the globe.
Our chief foreign affairs
correspondent, Margaret
Warner, begins our coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: North Korea
touted its latest
nuclear test as a major
breakthrough in deliverability.
WOMAN (through translator): The
nuclear test
finally examined and confirmed
the structure
and specific features of
movement of a nuclear
warhead standardized to be able
to be mounted
on strategic ballistic rockets.
This will enable the nation to
produce at
will and as many as it wants.
LISA DESJARDINS: That claim has
yet to be
substantiated.
But today's test was the North's
most powerful
yet.
International observers reported
the underground
blast had a seismic magnitude
larger than
any of the four previous tests.
South Korean officials estimate
the blast
had a yield of 10 kilotons, a
sharp increase
from the six-kiloton test in
January.
Just as ominous, North Korea has
demonstrated
growing success with ballistic
missiles.
On Monday, it fired off three
medium-range
rockets.
All flew more than 600 miles
before splashing
down in Japanese waters.
Last month, Pyongyang also
successfully launched
a submarine-based missile.
Today's nuclear test drew swift
condemnation.
In Seoul, South Korea's
president charged
North Korean leader Kim Jong-un
has gone mad.
PARK GEUN-HYE, South Korea
President (through
translator): North Korea's
nuclear test can
only be seen as a challenge to
the international
community.
And we and the international
community have
reached the limit of our
patience.
I think the mental condition of
Kim Jong-un
is out of control.
LISA DESJARDINS: China, North
Korea's closest
ally, warned against further
provocations.
HUA CHUNYING, Spokeswoman,
Chinese Ministry
of Foreign Affairs (through
translator): Any
unilateral action that is in the
interest
of its own will not yield
anything.
It could only intensify the
situation and
complicate the issue.
LISA DESJARDINS: And President
Obama, who
returned from Asia early today,
said in a
statement the U.S. will never
accept North
Korea as a nuclear state.
But top Republicans aimed their
criticism
at the White House.
A statement from House Speaker
Paul Ryan dismissed
the president's initiatives,
saying: "This
destabilizing activity is also a
consequence
of the administration's failed
policy of strategic
patience and its hollow pivot to
Asia."
Today's test marks the latest
setback in a
campaign to contain North
Korea's nuclear
ambitions, going back decades
and several
presidents.
North Korea did agree to halt
its nuclear
weapons program back in 1994.
But the years since then have
seen an endless
cycle of on-off negotiations,
threats, sanctions
and ever more advanced tests by
the North.
A State Department spokeswoman
was asked what
happens next.
ELIZABETH TRUDEAU, State
Department Spokesperson:
We won't stop our efforts in
working with
our international partners to
increase pressure
on this very opaque regime in
reaction to
provocative acts like this.
LISA DESJARDINS: In New York,
the United Nations
Security Council met yet again
in emergency
session to condemn the North,
and weigh its
options.
But China, which has veto power
on the Council,
stopped short of saying it would
back new
sanctions.
That prompted Secretary of
Defense Ash Carter
to say that Beijing has an
important responsibility
and needs to do more.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more and to
explore the
world's options, we turn to Gary
Samore.
He served on the national
security staff during
the first term of the Obama
administration
as the coordinator for arms
control and weapons
of mass destruction.
He's now at Harvard University's
Kennedy School
of Government.
And Greg Thielmann, he was the
director of
the Strategic, Proliferation and
Military
Affairs office at the State
Department from
2000-2002.
He's now on the board of
directors of the
Arms Control Association.
It's a pro-arms-control advocacy
group.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
Greg Thielmann, to you first.
We just heard this described as
the North's
most powerful nuclear test yet.
How significant was it?
®MD-BO / GREG THIELMANN, Former
U.S. State
Department Official: Well, it's
the latest
piece of bad news in terms of
North Korea's
continuing evolution of nuclear
and missile
programs.
It's the most powerful nuclear
test yet, the
second this year.
And it represents an
acceleration of North
Korea's movement in a very bad
direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what does
this say about
their nuclear capability, where
they can reach,
how much destruction they can
wreak?
GREG THIELMANN: It's very hard
to answer that
question precisely, because we
really don't
know how advanced the North
Koreans are in
being able to miniaturize their
nuclear devices,
so they fit on top of a
ballistic missile.
So, there's a lot of guesswork
involved.
But I think it's fair to say
that, at this
point, the North Koreans may
have the about
to put a nuclear warhead on a
medium-range
ballistic missile, and that
missile could
hit Japan, it could hit South
Korea.
And they are probably that far,
according
to what we hear from South Korea
and U.S.
intelligence sources.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gary Samore, what
are the North
Koreans trying to say with this
test, do you
believe?
GARY SAMORE, Former Presidential
Adviser on
Arms Control: Well, of course,
the specific
timing was to celebrate the 68th
anniversary
of the foundation of North
Korea.
But I think, more broadly, I
think Kim Jong-un
is determined to demonstrate
that he is not
going to be cowed or deterred by
U.N. Security
Council injunctions and the
threat of sanctions,
which are demanding the he halt
testing and
eventually give up his nuclear
weapons program.
So, I believe the North Koreans
are trying
to make it clear to the Security
Council and
to the big powers, especially
China and the
U.S., that they are determined
to retain and
expand their nuclear weapons
capability.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Greg Thielmann,
does this represent
a failure of American policy,
policy of the
rest the world toward North
Korea?
GREG THIELMANN: Well, I think,
almost by definition,
it represents a failure, since
the objective
that almost all countries in the
world agree
to which is not to expand the
number of countries
that possess nuclear attack
capability.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So -- but what's
been wrong
about that policy?
Has it been too tough?
Has it been too weak?
How do you size it up?
GREG THIELMANN: Well, of course,
U.S. nuclear
nonproliferation policy has
scored some impressive
successes, and I think the Iran
nuclear agreement
of last year is a good example
of that.
In the case of North Korea, it's
one of the
most difficult of all challenges
we have.
And there is certainly reason to
criticize
the North Koreans for being bad
negotiating
partners, and they have not been
willing to
carry out some of the
obligations to which
they have agreed.
But there are also problems on
the other side
of the table.
One of the problems we have
right now is,
there is no table.
We are not talking to the North
Koreans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There are no
negotiations going.
GREG THIELMANN: No.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me turn to
Gary Samore.
How do you see this question of
flat out that
this means what's been going on
until now
has failed?
GARY SAMORE: Yes, I think that's
right.
I mean, going back to President
Reagan, when
we first suspected that North
Korea was pursuing
a nuclear weapons program, the
United States
has tried many different ways to
slow down
or prevent North Korea from
acquiring nuclear
weapons, including nuclear
diplomacy.
We have had three agreements,
threats of preemptive
war, economic sanctions.
We have tried many different
methods, and
they have all failed.
And I think, as Greg says, it's
an indication
of how difficult this problem
is.
You have a country that is --
really feels
it has an existential need to
have nuclear
weapons in order to survive, and
the U.S.
options, whether they're
diplomatic, or coercive,
or military, are very limited.
So the question will be whether
or not this
test and North Korea's
continuing defiance
will create opportunities, in
particular for
the U.S. and China, to work
together, and
that will be seen in the U.N.,
whether or
not the Chinese are prepared to
support additional
sanctions measures.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you about
that, because, up until now, the
U.S., as
we know, has said there are
preconditions.
North Korea has to meet certain
conditions
before the U.S. will sit down at
the table
and talk.
Should that policy go away?
Should there now be talks
without preconditions?
GARY SAMORE: Well, just to be
clear, the U.S.
is prepared to meet with the
North Koreans,
with the North Korean diplomats
without any
conditions.
The question is, what are the
conditions for
nuclear negotiations, for formal
negotiation?
And, for me, a minimum condition
has to be
an agreement that the purpose of
nuclear negotiations
is to achieve eventual
disarmament.
Nobody expects that to happen in
the near-term,
but in some kind of sequence,
series of steps,
and, secondly, that while the
talks are going
on, North Korean refrain from
nuclear and
long-range missile testing.
To me, that's a reasonable
minimal requirement,
and I think you could get the
Chinese and
the other major powers involved
in the talks
to agree to that.
Now, the Obama administration
has been asking
for more.
They have been asking for
restraints on North
Korean fissile material
destruction as a precondition
-- or as a condition for
starting negotiations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
GARY SAMORE: I think that hasn't
worked.
And I think we have to look at
trying to come
to an agreement with China on
conditions that
are more realistic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Greg Thielmann,
how do you
see that?
What do you think needs to
happen now?
GREG THIELMANN: I mostly agree
with what Gary
said, but I think that we could
make a mistake
in even trying to get North
Korea to go back
to its previous commitment to a
denuclearized
Korean Peninsula.
I think, right now, that's
putting the bar
too high.
We need to negotiate with the
North Koreans.
And even if the objective -- the
only objective
we can agree to is a freeze on
North Korean
nuclear and ballistic missile
testing, I think
that, too, would have value.
And that doesn't mean we have to
abandon our
objective to ultimately get rid
of all nuclear
weapons in the Korean Peninsula.
But to require the North
Koreans, before entering
negotiation, to accept that as
the ultimate
objective of the negotiations I
think is asking
too much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you're saying,
what, tell
the North Koreans what?
We will sit down with you --
what?
GREG THIELMANN: We will sit down
and negotiate
the terms of a freeze on nuclear
and ballistic
missile testing.
And we will make very clear that
our objective
is to ultimately get rid of all
nuclear weapons
in the Korean Peninsula, as the
North Koreans
had previously agreed to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gary Samore, does
that sound
like the right path?
GARY SAMORE: Right now, the
North Koreans
are not prepared to talk about
nuclear disarmament,
nor are they prepared to accept
any restriction
on their testing activity.
And unless you establish, it
seems to me,
a basic premise for the talks,
then -- or
for the negotiations, then
you're not going
to get anywhere if you don't at
least with
have an agreement on what it's
all about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's a
moment when a
lot of questions are being
asked.
And we know that it's --
certainly, what North
Korea has done has certainly
gained everyone's
attention.
Gary Samore, we thank you.
Greg Thielmann, we thank you.
GREG THIELMANN: You're welcome.
GARY SAMORE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
continuing coverage
of the upcoming 15th anniversary
of the September
11 attacks.
We begin with a look at the
country where
the attacks were planned,
Afghanistan.
The U.S. and NATO deposed the
Taliban government
in the fall of 2001, but 15
years later, American
troops continue to fight and die
there, while
trying to help the Afghans stand
up an army
to take on a resurgent Taliban.
From Kabul, special
correspondent Jennifer
Glasse reports.
JENNIFER GLASSE: At the Regional
Corps Battle
School in Laghman Province in
Eastern Afghanistan,
these Afghan soldiers, many with
years of
battlefield experience, have
been learning
leadership skills from coalition
forces.
It's an Afghan-run school with
U.S. soldiers
and NATO troops serving as
advisers.
Part of the lesson plan,
U.S.-style military
organization.
After completing seven weeks of
training,
these men become noncommissioned
officers,
a rank that had been exclusive
to the United
States military.
Adam Weiner is an adviser.
2ND.
LT.
ADAM WEINER, Military Adviser:
We have a strong
leadership in the officer and
NCO side, and
we see the benefits that that
has for our
Army.
And so we have tried to instill
that into
their training as well to
empower their noncommissioned
officers to take a bigger role
in leading
soldiers alongside their officer
counterparts
in their units.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Some of these
Afghan soldiers
fought alongside U.S. forces in
Eastern Afghanistan.
With only a few American special
forces still
in the country, Afghans must
rely on U.S.
airpower when things get tough.
MAN (through translator): When
the air support
comes, every soldier, every
fighter has better
morale.
They are refreshed and fight
with new energy
against the enemy.
Also, in some districts, there
are high mountains,
and we can not go there.
So we need the airplanes to
target the enemy.
JENNIFER GLASSE: But after 15
years of U.S.
and coalition efforts on the
ground and least
$65 billion, Afghan security
forces are still
a development project.
The task of building a military
here didn't
start until 2009, with a
commitment from President
Obama to do the hard work needed
to help Afghanistan
stand on its own, and reducing
the need for
U.S. troops.
General John Nicholson is the
commander of
U.S. and NATO forces in
Afghanistan.
He's served here before, but now
commands
an international force far
smaller than years
past.
GEN.
JOHN NICHOLSON, U.S. Commander
in Afghanistan:
We're trying to build an
airplane while in
flight, OK?
So they're fighting a war while
we're trying
to build an army.
This is very hard.
And when you look at the
histories of any
of our Western coalition force
members who
are here, they have had a
similar long journey
to build the professional armies
that we have
today.
And so this is primarily the
challenge, casualties,
the need to develop leaders, the
need to develop
systems where none previously
existed.
So, it does take time.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Sergeant 1st
Class Philip
Nixon is serving a second tour
here.
In 2010, he was fighting in
Southern Afghanistan.
Now he's the platoon leader of
the Guardian
Angels, a mix of U.S. and NATO
troops charged
with protection of the military
advisers and
their bases across the country.
SGT. 1ST CLASS PHILIP NIXON,
Guardian Angels:
Compared to when I was here in
Afghanistan
six years ago, the Afghan army,
the ANA have
come a long way.
They are -- the facilities are
much better.
Their soldiers seem to be doing
a lot.
I think what we're able to do
here with the
train, advise, and assist
mission has improved
drastically from the last time I
was here.
JENNIFER GLASSE: A lot has
changed in six
years.
The U.S. policy in Afghanistan
remains focused
on counterterrorism, but now
they're relying
on the Afghans to execute most
of that mission.
American troops on this base are
part of the
main mission of U.S. forces here
in Afghanistan
to train, advise and assist
Afghan security
forces.
There's an Afghan base just next
door, and
there are bases like this all
over Afghanistan,
like Shorabak in Helmand
Province, Southern
Afghanistan, where Afghan
trainers and U.S.
advisers are putting the Afghan
215 Corps
through their paces.
American and British forces left
Helmand in
2014.
After the Taliban made
considerable gains
in the absence of coalition
forces, hundreds
of U.S. troops have returned.
Now, with new leaders in the
Afghan corps,
the coalition is teaching them
new tactics
to fight a resurgent Taliban.
Within the past year, the
Taliban briefly
captured Kunduz city in the
North this summer,
this summer besieged Lashkar Gah
in the south,
and this week threatened Tirin
Kot in Central
Afghanistan.
GEN.
JOHN NICHOLSON: When you look at
the population
and district control, the
Afghans control
about 68 percent of the
population and about
62 percent of the districts.
The Taliban control about 10
percent of the
population and 10 percent of the
districts;
25 percent of the country is
contested.
It's in play.
JENNIFER GLASSE: And the fight
isn't just
on the battlefields.
The Taliban strikes wherever it
can.
Just behind me is the Ministry
of Defense.
A few minutes ago, there were
two explosions,
the police and security forces,
you can see,
out in full force.
They're moving the people back.
This is a very busy market area.
And it is one of the busiest
parts of the
day, as businesses let out, as
offices let
out, so the streets were very,
very full.
The police say some suspicious
men went over
there, so they're moving
everybody as far
back as they can.
This is the kind of security
problem that
Afghans face on a daily basis.
This Taliban attack in Kabul was
particularly
brutal and deadly.
First, a remote-controlled bomb
went off.
Then, as help arrived for the
wounded, a suicide
bomber dressed in an Afghan army
uniform detonated
himself in the crowd of helpers.
At least 35 people were killed,
including
an army general and three senior
police officers.
More than 90 were wounded.
And the Taliban aren't the only
threat in
Afghanistan.
GEN.
JOHN NICHOLSON: Of the 60
designated terrorist
organizations that the U.S. has
identified,
10 of them reside in this
region.
So, our presence here enables us
to keep pressure
on those organizations and
prevent another
9/11.
JENNIFER GLASSE: Both al-Qaida
and the Islamic
State are in Afghanistan.
The U.S. commander got expanded
authorities
this year to fight both ISIS and
the Taliban
directly.
So, again, U.S. forces are
fighting here,
supported by American planes.
But the Afghans remain on the
front line.
They have a new air force, but
it will take
years before its at full
strength and capacity,
and Afghan ground forces
continue to take
punishing casualties.
Last year, more than 5,500 died
and 14,000
were wounded.
Casualties this year are up an
estimated 20
percent, the price of defending
a country
they got back from the Taliban
15 years ago.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jennifer Glasse
in Kabul.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what the 9/11
memorials mean to victims'
families in their
own words.
But, first: the analysis of
Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
Welcome to you both.
It's good to see you again.
Let's talk about the
presidential campaign.
David, we saw the two candidates
together
at the same place this week, but
not at the
same time, at this televised
forum that NBC
sponsored.
What did you make of it, of
their performance
and what they had to say?
DAVID BROOKS: I thought they
both lost.
I thought America lost.
Humanity lost.
A little piece of my soul died.
I thought they...
JUDY WOODRUFF: That bad?
DAVID BROOKS: I thought they
both did poorly.
I thought she was evasive and
cross and looked
like she was imperious and was
angry to be
challenged.
She had plenty of information,
but not a lot
of relatability and not a lot of
humanity
and not a lot of vision for
foreign policy.
He, if anything, was a little
worse.
He is, and as he has wont to do,
said about
six ridiculous things.
The admiration for Putin is of
long standing.
But to me, the thing that really
made me think
was his claim that in Iraq we
should have
left a core of people to take
the oil.
Now, that is -- first of all,
it's impractical,
but it's also moral idiocy.
Maybe you're selfish and you
think, oh, I
got some oil and I got some
guns, I should
take it.
But if you go through any realm
of education,
which is what we try to do with
people, you
learn that that's called
imperialism, that's
called plunder.
It's morally wrong.
It ruins your credibility.
The idea that a big country is
going to go
out and send troops into some
country to take
their resources, and then the
rest of the
world is going to somehow trust
us is just
a ridiculous notion.
And so he says things that are
just plainly
ridiculous.
But -- so that's why was so
depressed.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mark,
humanity lost as
a result of this encounter or
this performance
this week?
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, I wasn't --
it wasn't
Lincoln-Douglas.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And most
importantly of all,
I think David's point about the
oil is well-taken.
I think it's valid and I think
it's true.
That is not the United States.
That is pillaging.
That is the worst form of
imperialism that
he's describing.
It would mean leaving thousands
of Americans
there to protect the oil
drilling.
I mean, it just is -- it's
indefensible on
logistical, moral and political
grounds.
But that aside, I think what it
did -- and
you have moderated debates.
I have never moderated a debate,
Judy, for
good reason.
But I think it's raised this --
Wednesday
night, partially because of the
unflattering
press reaction to Matt Lauer's
performance,
has raised the stakes for the
moderator, who
is now put on notice, all of
them, that they
are not entitled in 2016 to sit
there while
somebody makes a statement that
is factually
untrue and is -- can be proven
false, as Mr.
Trump did when he, in fact, said
that he had
always opposed the United
States' war in Iraq.
And I just think that -- it's
tough to be
a moderator.
But I think that, given this
campaign and
the questions about the
integrity and honesty
of the candidates, and the great
doubts about
them, I think that is now part
of the job
description.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
that question
about the role of the moderator,
David?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
I watched the debate, and I
didn't think Matt
Lauer did that terribly.
I thought a lot of people who
were Clinton
partisans saw that she did bad,
and they decided
to blame him, which is what
normally happens
when one candidate does badly.
As for the role of the
moderator, I guess
I would say in moderation.
If the moderator corrects a fact
or two, that
would be fine.
If it turns into an argument
between the moderator
and the candidate, that is not
what we want.
And the final point to be made,
just in terms
of cognitive science, the idea
that when you
correct a fact, you erase that
fact from people's
memories is the reverse of the
truth.
When you correct a fact, what
you do is you
further lodge that fact into
people's minds,
and they remember the error.
And we have had all these
fact-checking services
on TV in the print, three
Pinocchios, liar,
liar, pants on fire award, and
we have not
entered a more factual era of
American politics.
We have entered a less factual
era.
So, there's just that blunt fact
that it doesn't
work.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mark, is this
really all
about the fact that Hillary
Clinton didn't
do as well as her supporters
wanted her to
do?
MARK SHIELDS: No.
I mean, I think there are
people, obviously,
who criticized Matt Lauer on
that basis.
And I'm not trying to pile on
Matt Lauer.
But I think the difference,
Judy, between
a debate and what we saw
Wednesday night is
that a debate, as you know and
our viewers
know, is a simultaneous
occurrence, when the
two are there at the same time,
and they can
respond in real time to each
other.
And I think that, you know, we
get 90 million
people at a presidential debate.
There is no question that, in
1980, Ronald
Reagan had been portrayed as a
war-monger,
somebody who couldn't do
anything off a script.
And the one debate with
President Jimmy Carter,
he stood toe-to-toe and
reassured people that
he wasn't bound and determined
to start World
War III on the spot and could
make a coherent
statement.
So, I mean, there is a lot more
to a debate
than there was on Wednesday
night.
And, in 2004, I think it's
pretty obvious
that John Kerry won the three
debates on debating
terms, but in the final
analysis, George Bush
was reelected because voters
chose "I like"
over "I.Q."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MARK SHIELDS: And that's what
one gets, is
a sense of their personality,
the character,
how they treat each other, how
they treat
the moderator.
So I think that's why -- I think
it upped
the audience for the next
debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, what about
-- in this
race, the polls have tightened.
What do you attribute that to?
DAVID BROOKS: I don't know.
After the stock market drops 300
points, then
the stock market analysis
invents some story
to go along with it, oh, there
was a correction.
And so what we tend to when the
polls tighten
is, we invent a story to go back
for it.
And they have tightened.
They have tightened from maybe a
seven-point
Clinton lead to a maybe a two-
or three-point
Clinton lead.
And so they have tightened.
But I have not seen Donald Trump
run a better
campaign.
I have not seen Hillary Clinton
run a worse
campaign.
So, it could just be -- and one
-- as one
travels around the country, one
is just constantly
barraged with the upsetness.
People are just dispirited.
And it could be in that general
air of dispiritedness,
you settle toward parity,
because they're
dispirited about everybody.
And that would be my only
theory.
But I have not noticed one
candidate or the
other radically altering their
performance
that explain a loss or a rise.
It should finally be said,
Trump's numbers
are pretty flat.
The variation tends to be in the
Clinton numbers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, how do you
see that?
Do you have an explanation for
what's going
on?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I do.
I have an explanation, because I
think that's
part of our responsibility, to
come up with
explanations, whether they're
valid or not.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: No, I think, Judy,
Americans
don't like powerful figures who
punch down,
that is, who pick on someone
less powerful
and less able to speak for
themselves than
they are.
And I think Donald Trump was
guilty of that
on a sustained basis after the
convention,
the time of the Democratic
Convention, on
his abuse of a federal judge
whose parents
had emigrated from Mexico, and
in particular
his picking on and really
abusing Mr. and
Mrs. Khan, the Gold Star
parents.
He hasn't done that recently.
And that reaches the bar of
presidential in
behavior.
But the problem is, this is a
change election.
Americans don't like the way
Washington operates.
They don't like Washington.
They don't like the way things
are going.
They like the president, but
they do not like
Washington, D.C.
And Hillary Clinton has become
the status
quo.
By a 2-1 margin, voters believe
that Donald
Trump would change business as
usual in Washington,
but by almost as large a margin,
they believe
that Hillary Clinton would be
better in a
crisis and less of a decisive
margin she cares
about people like them.
So, you have got this change
election where
he is a change -- represents
change that is
really unappealing, that is
threatening to
people.
And I think that's the election.
But there's no question that she
has not come
across, as thus far -- she
started to open
up this week with the press and
letting them
in.
But if you think about personal
Hillary Clinton,
you have got to go back to the
primary day
in 2008, when she showed such
vulnerability,
appealing vulnerability, and
when she reached
out to the girl who was being
bullied during
the Iowa caucuses this year.
Other than that, she's been a
private sort
of issues paper and position
paper.
And I don't think that's going
to be enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, just
quickly, character
issues or questions, David,
thrown back and
forth between these two
candidates almost
on an hour-by-hour basis.
Yesterday, The Washington Post
editorialized
it's time for the press to lay
off Hillary
Clinton's e-mails.
What about that, A?
And, quickly, B, the story this
week about
Donald Trump's foundation giving
money to
the Florida attorney general
that was looking
at whether to investigate Trump
University?
How do we assess all of this?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, for him,
there is a virtue
in shamelessness.
He admits that he's in the
influence-buying
game.
And he was clearly trying to buy
influence.
So, at some level, since he's so
shameless,
he gets less of a rap than
Clinton, who denies
she's in the game, though she
clearly is.
I happen to think those -- the
e-mail story
and the other stories are sort
of baked in
the cake.
It actually would be interesting
at this point
if they actually talked about
something that
the next president is going to
do, like health
care reform will have to be
done.
There are actually a whole
series of policy
issues.
It would be interesting if one
of them came
out and said, well, the health
care, the Obamacare
has to be fixed, and here's
exactly how I'm
going to do that, and they made
that an emphasis.
I actually think that would go
over big because
people are -- as I said, are so
dispirited
by the contentless post-policy
tone that has
marked this campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Would that make a
difference,
Mark?
The candidates have been talking
-- they have
been giving a speech here and
there about
policy and putting some papers
out.
I certainly -- I know Secretary
Clinton has.
MARK SHIELDS: No, Secretary
Clinton has, Judy.
I think Mr. Trump's are in the
works, and
we can look for them before
Halloween.
But, I mean, David put his
finger on it when
she said Donald Trump is
shameless about it.
He said -- he was asked why he
contributed
to both Democrats and
Republicans, said, when
I want something, I get it, and
when I call
them, they kiss my ass, which is
not found
in Bartlett's under most
presidents' famous
quotations.
And I just think that does belie
a cynicism
and probably comports with the
cynicism that
voters feel right now.
They don't believe Washington.
And he's not being punished for
it or paying
a penalty for it.
And, you know, I think that
remains a problem.
Whoever wins, you have got to
give a sense
of what two things you're going
to do specifically
to make things better.
And I don't think even the
partisans of both
candidates could say right now
what two specific
things their president would do
in his or
her first 90 days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just in the last
45 seconds,
David, a passing this week of
someone who
was an icon in the conservative
movement,
Phyllis Schlafly, 92 years old.
She left an important mark,
didn't she?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
She came of age and personified
the era when
the cultural war and the Sexual
Revolution
issues rose up and dominated
American politics,
whether it was issues of gay
rights or gay
marriage, abortion.
And she sort of exemplified that
and created
a new right that really fueled
the Republican
Party.
I happen to think she passes at
a time when
those cultural wars, Sexual
Revolution issues
are fading from the scene, and
the coming
generation has basically settled
them, and
not necessarily in a Phyllis
Schlafly direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields, in
10 seconds
a word about Phyllis Schlafly?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, she --
Phyllis Schlafly
was that, and she was more.
She almost became a political
kingmaker.
I mean, her endorsement, her
support was sought
eagerly and coveted by the
leading Republican
presidential candidates.
And she had an enormous
influence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
thank you very
much.
David Brooks, have a great
weekend, both of
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we return to
the months-long
stand-off over the building of a
controversial
pipeline in North Dakota.
It's intended to carry oil from
the state's
Bakken region across South
Dakota and Iowa
to an existing pipeline in
Illinois, which
is on hold after conflicting
government rulings.
Lisa Desjardins has the story.
LISA DESJARDINS: The protests
began in April,
when members of the Standing
Rock Sioux Tribe
complained that a spill from the
pipeline
would contaminate the Missouri
River and lakes
near their lands.
The Sioux also have said
construction would
harm sacred tribal grounds.
In recent weeks, they have been
joined by
other Native American tribes and
environmental
groups.
The company and some local
officials have
said the pipeline will create
jobs and boost
energy production in the U.S.
Our William Brangham is
reporting near the
Standing Rock Reservation.
I spoke to him a short time ago
and asked
him what the immediate reaction
was like today.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Yes, this has
been a day
that nobody here really wanted
to see happen.
I don't know if you can see
behind me, but
this is the camp.
This is the main area where
people have been
gathering for weeks, and this is
the worst
possible news initially.
Interestingly, the word is
slowly starting
to trickle out.
I mean, in fact, many people I
talked to this
afternoon, I was the one telling
them the
news about the hearing, because
the cell phone
service here is really bad, and
so people
are not getting the news as
quickly as some
of us are.
But the general sense was that
people were
really disappointed.
There's been a sense of
resignation.
Many people feared that this
would be the
judge's ruling, that they
thought that the
Corps would be allowed to do
this and that
the energy company would be
allowed to put
the pipeline in.
When the news also came that the
Justice Department
is considering stepping in and
putting a stop
to this, that only gave people a
certain level
of hope.
The people that I talked to said
they think
this is going to be an ongoing,
protracted
battle for weeks, months, maybe
years to come.
LISA DESJARDINS: William,
specifically, what
is the tribe's complaint?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The principal
argument the
Standing Rock Tribe has is that
the construction
of this pipeline is going to do,
one, it's
going to destroy a lot of very,
very important
cultural sites to them, burial
grounds, historic
meeting places for their people,
and, number
two, that the pipeline, which,
although it
is not going to go through
tribal lands, it
is just a short distance away.
The pipeline will go underneath
the river.
And many people are concerned
that if a pipeline
that is carrying hundreds of
thousands of
gallons of oil goes underneath
the river,
that there could be some sort of
a rupture
and, if that happens, that might
spill oil
into their primary source of
drinking water.
And so that's been the main
concern, that
the construction of the pipeline
is going
to destroy lands that are very,
very important
to them and that the potential
for contamination
is enormous.
LISA DESJARDINS: This would be a
very significant
pipeline, carrying about half of
current Bakken
oil production.
How is the industry responding?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The company
that is building
the pipeline has argued all
along that they
followed the rules, they filled
out the right
permits, they got all the right
permissions,
they did the proper surveys, and
that they
have broken no laws whatsoever.
In fact, that's not really been
the allegation
thus far.
The tribe's main concern has
been with the
Army Corps of Engineers, who
granted one of
the main permits for the
pipeline to go in.
And the Corps says too that they
did all the
proper consultations.
But the oil company argues also
that they
think this is an important
economic engine
for the area.
They say there will be jobs in
construction
of the pipeline, jobs in
maintaining the pipeline,
and that they say, look, we
still live in
an oil-based society, and if oil
needs to
get from the Bakken oil fields
to market,
this pipeline is the delivery
device for that.
LISA DESJARDINS: It seems there
are really
two parts to this fight, the
court battle
and on-the-ground protests.
William, explain what happens
now in each.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Obviously,
with regards
to the courts, who knows how
that's going
to play out.
The Justice Department may step
in forcefully
on this.
We will have to wait and see on
that.
As far as what happens here on
the ground,
we have heard from some people
who've said,
regardless of what happens with
the courts,
with the rulings, with the Army
Corps, there
is a certain group of people
here who argue
they will do everything that
they can to not
let this pipeline go forward.
We have heard people talking
about the possibility
of physically putting themselves
in the way
of the construction equipment,
of the workers' camps.
And how widespread that
sentiment is, I don't
really know.
And we will see in the next days
and weeks,
if the construction really does
take off,
whether or not those actions
come true.
But there is a minority of
people here, at
least, that will do everything
they possibly
can to try to stop this from
going forward.
LISA DESJARDINS: Our William
Brangham, speaking
with us from North Dakota, thank
you.
And we look forward to seeing
your reports
in coming days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
some thoughts
as we approach, on Sunday, the
15th anniversary
of the 9/11 attacks.
There are national memorials at
three sites.
In New York City, the World
Trade Center Memorial
attracts millions of visitors.
Two reflecting pools inscribed
with the names
of the nearly 3,000 people who
died in all
of the attacks sit in the
footprint of the
original Twin Towers.
There's also a museum and a
park.
The Pentagon Memorial is off the
beaten path,
located directly behind the
building.
It has small benches poised
above lighted
pools to remember the 184 people
who died
at the Pentagon and on American
Airlines Flight
77 that crashed into it.
In Shanksville, Pennsylvania,
the memorial
is in a remote field, set upon
the crash site
of Flight 93.
We have a collection now of
voices, including
family members, visitors and
writers, who
share their thoughts on the
meaning of these
memorials.
LARRY CONOVER: I think it's a
memory that
all of us will carry with us all
of our lives.
I know my parents' generation,
they thought
of Pearl Harbor.
That was kind of a signal moment
for them.
For my generation, it was this
tragic event
that happened here on 9/11.
LORETTA VARGAS: From the
devastation, to how
it looks right now, it just --
it's a meditation
for me.
And I'm just in my space of
gratitude that
I'm here.
PAUL GOLDBERGER, "Vanity
Fair®MD-BO /": The
most powerful thing of all about
the site
is the void, the sense that
there, where these
incredibly tall, strong
buildings stood, is
just emptiness now.
But there are also the names.
The names are a remembrance.
They are a sign that those
people who are
gone will be remembered
permanently.
And then there is water, which
is a sign of
renewal and nature.
The sound of the waterfall
drowning out the
sounds of the city is also very,
very important,
because it helps take you into
another place
when you're there.
DANA ORR: I'm so proud of the
city for not,
you know, putting something new,
like, right
in this spot.
Like, I understand that the fact
that there
needed to be another building.
I understand that life goes on.
But I am just -- I'm so proud
that this memorial
is not only here, but it's as
big.
PAUL GOLDBERGER: In New York,
the memorial
at Ground Zero had a particular
challenge,
to allow that entire 16 acres to
have been
a memorial.
While it might seem, on the
surface, to be
a way to honor the dead even
more by giving
them and their memory all 16
acres, it would
have actually have been a
terrible mistake,
because it would have carved a
huge hole in
the heart of America's largest
city.
And restoring the life of the
city was an
important part of the mission.
JIM LAYCHAK, President, Pentagon
Memorial
Fund: I view the memorial as a
place that
family members can come.
Whenever they need to reflect or
gain some
hope or some renewal, they can
come any time.
My name is Jim Laychak.
I'm president of the Pentagon
Memorial Fund.
And I lost my brother Dave here
in the Pentagon
on 9/11.
I think about Dave a lot.
So, I don't have to be somewhere
to think
of him.
A song will come on, or I will
see my kids
or his kids doing something that
reminds me
of him, or I will have a memory
of something
when we were growing up that
helped me remember
him.
But I think this is more for
those who lost
friends here and really need it
when they
need it.
MAN: Last year, we went to New
York and saw
the 9/11 memorial for the first
time, so we
felt that we needed to come here
to almost
complete the journey to see
exactly what happened
here.
PHILIP KENNICOTT, The Washington
Post: It
was a challenge to make in some
ways, because
it included both people who were
at the Pentagon,
including military personnel,
and people who
were civilians on the plane who
died.
And so they had to look for a
way to memorialize
both groups of people.
JIM LAYCHAK: I'm actually
sitting on my brother
Dave's bench.
And the significance of it for
me is that
it's on 1961 age line, the year
that Dave
was born.
And you come up to the bench,
and you read
his name, you will see the
Pentagon in the
background, which signifies that
he was working
in the Pentagon.
GORDON FELT: The plane that went
down at Shanksville
had passengers on it who
actually resisted.
They chose to act.
They fought back.
They breached the cockpit and
fought for control
of that flight, and in doing so,
they saved
countless other lives and they
perhaps saved
the Capitol Building.
PHILIP KENNICOTT: It was one of
the very powerful
moments of 9/11, because it was
perhaps the
only moment in that day in which
the terrorists
weren't writing the narrative.
And so the passengers on that
plane are remembered
quite heroically.
And yet I think, very much to
the credit of
the design of Shanksville, it's
not a bombastic
memorial.
It's not about exaggerating the
importance
of that heroism, as important
that it is.
It's really about the loss of
the people and
a sense, truly a sense of
healing, more than
most of the memorials, because
it's in a rural
landscape.
KEN NACKE, Brother of September
11 Victim:
This is where my brother is.
This is where I choose to
remember his last
moments on this world and talk
to him, tell
him, you know, how proud -- you
know, that
he's missed and that he's loved.
PHILIP KENNICOTT: What's
happened, I think,
is the natural progression, as
the event recedes
farther into history, there is a
tendency
to divide those people who were
personally
connected from the events from
the rest of
us who remember them now
increasingly as historical
events.
You see people who wander
through, who look,
who are looking at it as an
object, as a historical
marker.
And then you see people who
really engage,
who touch, who feel, who sit,
who contemplate.
PAUL GOLDBERGER: There will be
more people
who were not around on 9/11, who
didn't experience
it, who will come there to learn
about it,
and, we hope, to feel some
emotion that is
not connected to their own
memories, but to
what this place brings to them,
what it confers,
what it inspires inside them.
The great things speak to those
of us who
weren't there then and transcend
time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One postscript to
all of this:
An American flag that was part
of an iconic
photo taken on September 11,
2001, and then
went missing for years is being
returned.
Three New York firefighters
grabbed the flag
from a nearby yacht in Lower
Manhattan after
the attacks.
The picture of them raising it
at Ground Zero
was seen around the world.
For reasons that are still
unclear, it disappeared
from the site within days.
It has been found in Everett,
Washington.
A man who said he was a retired
Marine turned
it over to a local fire station
after saying
that it was given to him as a
gift.
Many questions remain, but
forensic scientists
say that they have confirmed it
is indeed
the missing flag.
Online, we continue our
remembrance.
One woman whose high school is
just blocks
from Ground Zero explains how
she teaches
a new generation of students
about the attacks.
And a quick news update before
we go tonight.
U.S. Secretary of State John
Kerry and his
Russian counterpart, Sergei
Lavrov, have announced
a cease-fire to halt the
violence in Syria,
after multiple failed attempts
to reach a
similar deal.
The new plan is scheduled to go
into effect
on Monday, and it aims to reduce
the bloodshed
after more than five years of
war.
And Republican vice presidential
nominee and
Indiana Governor Mike Pence has
released 10
years of tax returns.
They show that he earned an
adjusted income
of $113,000 last year, and paid
an effective
tax rate of 12.4 percent.
His running mate, Donald Trump,
has not released
his own returns.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for a
special edition
of "Washington Week," which airs
later this
evening -- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Hi, Judy.
After a week of debate about
national security
and potential commanders in
chief, we're here
in Colorado Springs, the home of
five -- count
them, five -- military
installations, to see
how the voters are taking it, on
air and online
tonight on "Washington Week,"
Colorado edition.
See you Monday, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
watching.
See you then.
On "PBS NewsHour" Saturday, our
look back
at 9/11 15 years later continues
with a report
on the five men accused of
planning the attacks,
remain at the U.S. military
prison in Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, and still have not
been brought
to justice.
And we will be back right here
on Monday,
where we kick off a weeklong
special series,
Rethinking College.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a wonderful weekend.
Thank you, and good night.